---
layout: post
title: "4x4 Model of Knowledge Content"
date: 2017-07-17
---

When telling a story with data, it's important to understand how much information to share to which audience. I was recently talking to some data science students about Twitter and one of them mentioned some people to follow for interesting articles about data science. One of the first thoughts that popped into my head was that more options for articles is the last thing I need. With multiple email subscriptions and interesting pages I follow, it can seem like there's too much information available. In order to get people interested in your particular content, they should be introduced to it in a quick fun way before having to read a 5-page essay.

### The 4x4 Model helps to deliver content in *layers* in order to get the best content to people at the right time. It was developed by Bill Shander, CEO and founder of Beehive Media.

I decided to use this method in devloping a story around formal alliance data "International Military Alliances" (1). This dataset catalogues every international alliance since 1816. The steps are as follows:

## 1. The Watercooler

Watercooler content is made up of short, attention grabbing snippets of information. It gives context and it's the content that people will look at to decide whether or not to spend more time learning about the topic. 

Example: A headline of an article.

Time: Very short (seconds)

Possible Topics for Military Alliance story:

1. Why countries are more likely to have military alliances with neighbors.
2. The 4 types of alliance and how they affect peace.
3. Military alliances - Conflict and Peace.
4. The neutrality pact could be a good predictor of future conflict


Then taking the concept and changing into into a headline:

1. Keep Your Friends Close, but Your Enemies Closer
2. Agreeing to Disagree - Conflict Countries
3. Alliances: not all created equal
4. Neutral on the dotted line, conflict at the border



## 2. The Cafe

If someone's interest is piqued, they may want to watch a short video on the topic, or read a short article. This is cafe content. It's still light and interesting and will also help people evaluate if they want to delve deeper into learning.

Example: Graph

Time: A few minutes

Alliance Example: I decided to create a visualization to accompany the information as something simple and interesting that people can use to explore the data. The purpose is to be able to investigate specific countries and continents that form neutrality pacts. By looking at the year they were formed, users could delve deeper into learning about specific alliances.

The initial graphic shows only these alliances but as a next step I'd like to join some military conflict data to the visualization to show the relationship between neutrality pacts and conflict.


## 3. The Research Library

This is where someone will spend large amounts of time researching a topic. It may be through reading a book or watching a longer video.

Example: 50 page PDF report

Time: Mins/Hours

Alliance example: This could be individual research someone does on a specific neutrality agreement or reading the blog post I added below. 


## 4. The Lab

After learning more about the topic, people may want to explore the underlying data themselves in order to draw new conclusions and explore. In making the data and sources available, people can use them as needed.

Example: Data used to create graphs

Alliance example: Some sources I cited could be used to learn more about the topic and evaluate the raw data.

Time: Mins/Hours

# Neutral on the Dotted Line, Conflict at the Border


An alliance is defined as a formal contingent commitment made by two or more states to some further action. A written form of the agreement is often made public to other states in the system. 

## Types of Military Agreement (highest to lowest):

### defense : country 1 signed a defense pact to protect country 2

### neutrality : country 1 agreed to remain neutral toward country 2

### nonaggression : country 1 promised not to attack country 2

### entente : country 1 agreed to consult with country 2 if a crisis occurred

Singer and Small (1968, 280n10) note that  neutrality and nonaggression pacts have historically had a greater impact on the international system than defense pacts.

## Comparing Military Disputes and Alliances:

Quackenbush created a regression model to understand the relationship between military disputes between states and formal alliances. The coefficient between these variables (-0.5586) was negative and highly significant at a level of p < 0.001. This suggests that alliance commitment has a pacifying effect between allies. 

A separate model was created, analyzing military disputes as they correlate with each of the four types of alliance.

### defense : -0.3927 (p < 0.001)

### neutrality : 0.4801 (p < 0.001)

### nonaggression : -0.1733 (p < 0.01)

### entente/consultation : -0.0482 (no significant impact)

### offense: 0.03417 (no impact) (Not suprising, made with conflict in mind)


As expected, defense agreements make two states significantly less likely to fight each other. 

On the other hand, neutrality agreements significantly increased the likeliness of conflict. Neutrality provisions are the least common type of provision and seem to be included in alliances only when there's reason to believe that an ally may not remain neutral in a future conflict.

For example, the Simla Agreement was signed between India and Pakistan in 1972 in order to "put an end to the conflict and confrontation that have hitherto marred their relations". Despite the agreement, the countries experiences armed conflict, most recently in the Kargil War of 1999 (3).

To look at more examples of international neutrality agreements throughout history, take a look at a visualization I made <a href="https://laurenschroeder.github.io/alliances/">here</a>.

Nonaggression agreements (without neutrality provisions) are more likely to lead to peace between the countries.

Entente agreements didn't have a significant impact on conflict.

Overall, allied states see less conflict but the results depend more on the specific agreements of the alliance. Nonagression and defense agreements show decreased conflict in the future but neutrality provisions tend to correlate with future conflict.


## Dataset:

These formalized alliances are tracked and compiled into a dataset that can be used by alliance theory researchers (2). There are also many informal alliances and trade agreements that are imperative to international relationships but that are omitted from this dataset which consists only of military agreements. 

The highest level of agreement between two states in any given year was recorded.

Citations

1. International Conflict: Logic and Evidence
Stephen L. Quackenbush
CQ Press, Aug 1, 2014 - Political Science - 360 pages

2. Gibler, Douglas M. 2009. International military alliances, 1648-2008. CQ Press.  

3. "Indo-Pak Shimla Agreement: 40 years later". IANS. IBN Live, CNN IBN. 2 July 2012. Retrieved 27 September 2013.